Many teams begin by choosing a framework, drawing a multi-agent diagram,
and asking several models to debate.
Anthropic found that successful production systems often use simpler,
composable patterns.
Quality depends less on the number of agents than on clear task
boundaries, evaluation criteria, and environmental feedback.
A complex architecture may not improve completion, but it will increase
model calls, latency, cost, and debugging.
Every extra handoff adds another chance to lose context or pass a
mistake forward.
In this video, we will answer three questions that are easy to get
wrong: when one model call is enough, which of five common workflow
patterns fits the task, and when an autonomous agent is actually worth
the risk.
By the end, you will have an Agent Architecture Decision Ladder that you
can use on a real project, instead of paying for complexity just to make
the system look more agentic.
Start with the distinction that controls every later decision.
In a workflow, code defines the execution path in advance.
A model may perform one step, but the program still controls the
sequence.
In an agent, the model uses the current result to choose what to do
next, which tool to call, and when the task should stop.
An expense report that always moves through extraction, policy checks,
and approval has a path you can draw before execution.
That is a strong workflow task.
An incident investigation is different.
You may read logs first, then inspect metrics, and only then decide
whether to investigate the database, the network, or the code.
The path emerges from evidence, so an agent can add real value.
Neither one is more advanced.
Workflows optimize for consistency and predictability.
Agents optimize for flexibility and model-directed decisions.
The most important principle is to find the simplest viable solution and
increase complexity only when the result is measurably inadequate.
Inadequate does not mean the diagram looks unsophisticated.
It means completion rate, accuracy, latency, cost, or human intervention
misses a defined target.
If a new orchestration layer does not help the same evaluation set
finish more reliably, it is not an upgrade.
It is overhead.
Chapter recap.
First, use a workflow when the path is fixed.
Second, use an agent only when the path must be dynamic.
Third, every added layer must earn its place with a measurable result.
Before workflows and agents, there is a more useful default: the
augmented language model.
It is not a team of agents.
It is one model connected to retrieval, tools, and memory.
Retrieval supplies current external facts instead of relying only on
training data.
Tools let the model query an order, read a database, call an API, or
perform a real action.
Memory preserves useful state across steps.
These capabilities answer three different questions: what does the
system know, what can it do, and what has it already done?
Imagine a support assistant.
It retrieves the refund policy, looks up the order, calls the refund
API, and remembers what the customer confirmed.
If order lookup fails, the tool must return the error instead of
inviting the model to invent an order status.
If a refund already ran, stored state and API idempotency must prevent a
duplicate payment.
That single augmented model can already complete many real tasks.
Multiple agents are not automatically necessary.
The key is not to connect as many capabilities as possible.
Each capability must fit the task, expose a clear interface, and be used
at the right time.
Running one augmented model on a controlled task usually reveals whether
the real gap is knowledge, action, or decision-making before you split
the system into roles.
Chapter recap.
First, retrieval provides external facts.
Second, tools perform real actions.
Third, memory preserves task state.
When one model call is not enough but the overall path is still
controllable, choose the workflow pattern that matches the uncertainty.
The first pattern is prompt chaining: split one difficult task into a
sequence of smaller steps.
For example, generate an outline, check it against explicit
requirements, and only then draft the document.
Each step solves one clear problem, and a programmatic gate can stop the
chain when the output is not ready.
Prompt chaining works when the task decomposes cleanly.
It costs more calls and time, but each call becomes easier to evaluate.
The useful part is the gate: if the outline has no audience, rewrite it;
if fact checking fails, do not continue to publication.
Do not let a weak intermediate result travel all the way to the end.
The second pattern is routing.
A router classifies the input and sends it to the right prompt, model,
or tool.
Customer requests might branch into product questions, refund requests,
and technical incidents.
Common cases can use a smaller model, while unusual cases use a stronger
one.
Routing works when categories need clearly different treatment and
classification is reliable.
It also needs a low-confidence path.
An uncertain input should go to a general process or a human, not be
forced into the wrong branch.
The third pattern is parallelization, and it has two distinct forms.
Sectioning runs independent subtasks at the same time and combines the
results.
To evaluate an AI answer, separate reviewers can check facts, safety,
clarity, and format in parallel.
Voting asks several independent attempts to judge the same question,
then aggregates their conclusions.
A security review might use different prompts to inspect the same code
from different risk perspectives.
Parallelization helps when subtasks are independent or when one judgment
is not reliable enough.
Independence matters.
Copying the same prompt three times often creates three versions of the
same bias, not three useful perspectives.
The fourth pattern is orchestrator-workers.
A central model understands the goal, discovers the required subtasks,
delegates them to workers, and combines their results.
The difference from ordinary parallel work is that the subtasks are not
known in advance.
The orchestrator decides them from the current input.
Consider changing a large codebase.
Before investigation, you do not know how many files must change or
which modules matter.
The orchestrator must first inspect the problem, then choose where to
search and what work to assign.
This pattern fits complex tasks that can be divided but cannot be fully
planned ahead.
Each worker still needs only the relevant context and a consistent
return format.
Otherwise, the final synthesis spends most of its budget reinterpreting
scattered output.
The fifth pattern is evaluator-optimizer.
One model generates a result, another evaluates it, and the first model
revises from concrete feedback.
In literary translation, the evaluator can check meaning, tone, and
terminology before proposing specific corrections.
The loop works only when feedback can demonstrably improve the result
and the evaluator can identify useful changes.
It also needs a stopping condition: reach a score, stop after no
improvement, or stop when the budget is exhausted.
Without a clear evaluation standard, the loop only increases cost.
It does not guarantee quality.
The reusable rule is to locate the uncertainty.
Use chaining for fixed steps, routing for different input classes,
parallelization for independent work, orchestrator-workers for runtime
task discovery, and evaluator-optimizer for outputs that can be
explicitly judged and improved.
Patterns can combine, but every addition must solve a named problem, and
every step must remain observable.
Chapter recap.
First, locate where uncertainty enters the task.
Second, choose the workflow that controls that uncertainty.
Third, add a pattern only when it solves a specific problem.
You enter true agent territory when the execution path cannot be
predicted and the model must keep adapting its plan from environmental
results.
The core of an agent is not mysterious.
It is a continuing decision loop.
The model interprets the goal, chooses an action, calls a tool, reads
the real result, and updates its plan.
The loop continues until the task completes, reaches a blocker, or hits
a stopping condition.
The critical question is not how long the model reasons.
It is whether each action produces reliable ground truth.
After a coding agent changes a file, it can run tests.
After a support agent issues a refund, it can read the API response.
After a browser agent clicks a button, it can verify that the page
changed as expected.
That feedback is how an agent knows whether it is making progress.
Customer support and coding are strong agent tasks because they combine
conversation with action and offer relatively clear success criteria.
Autonomy also raises cost and compounds error.
If every step were ninety percent reliable, ten correct steps in a row
would have a theoretical probability of only about thirty-five percent.
Real systems use checks and retries, but the arithmetic makes the
boundary obvious: a longer path cannot rely on confidence alone.
Production agents therefore need sandboxes, permission limits, maximum
iterations, explicit stopping rules, and human confirmation at critical
actions.
They also need a record of tool calls and environment responses so a
failure can be diagnosed, replayed, and recovered.
An agent is not the absence of control.
It gives dynamic decisions to the model and rebuilds control through
feedback and boundaries.
Reversible actions, such as reading information or drafting text, can
receive wider autonomy.
Payments, deletion, and external messages should receive narrow
permissions and pre-action approval.
A practical risk ladder is: automate low-risk actions, inspect
medium-risk actions after execution, and approve high-risk actions
before execution.
Chapter recap.
First, every action must read real environmental feedback.
Second, failure risk compounds across a long execution path.
Third, autonomy requires permissions and stopping conditions.
Even a capable model will fail repeatedly when its tools are difficult
to understand.
Humans need a well-designed interface to use software.
Models need a clear agent-computer interface to use tools.
Tool names must be specific, parameters must be unambiguous, and the
contract should show input formats, boundaries, examples, and edge
cases.
Similar tools need obvious differences.
Errors should state what failed, which input was invalid, and whether a
retry is safe.
Do not make the return format harder than the task.
Forcing a model to place large blocks of code inside heavily escaped
JSON creates avoidable errors.
Return only the information needed for the next decision; dumping an
entire log into context increases cost and hides the useful signal.
Anthropic found that its coding agent often made mistakes with relative
paths.
Changing the tool to require absolute paths made those mistakes much
harder to produce.
So do not optimize only the prompt.
Observe how the model misuses the interface, then change the interface
itself.
Before release, test missing parameters, invalid paths, repeated calls,
timeouts, and recovery behavior, not just ideal examples.
Chapter recap.
First, names, parameters, and boundaries must be clear.
Second, return formats should not create extra difficulty.
Third, design the interface so common errors are harder to make.
For a new task, walk through the architecture ladder in order.
First, can one model call, enhanced with retrieval and examples,
complete the task?
Second, if one call is not enough, can you define the steps in advance?
If yes, prefer chaining, routing, or parallelization.
Third, if the task can be divided but the required subtasks appear only
during investigation, use orchestrator-workers.
Fourth, use an autonomous agent only when the whole path depends on
environmental feedback and the model must keep making its own decisions.
Frameworks can quickly connect model calls, tools, and workflow steps,
but extra abstraction can hide the real prompt, model output, and
failure.
A framework is fine only when you still understand what happens
underneath it.
Before upgrading, save a baseline for the simplest system.
Compare task completion, average cost, latency, and human interventions
on common, difficult, and boundary cases.
Break metrics down by task type so averages cannot hide a critical
regression.
If the complex system does not produce a stable improvement, return to
the simpler one.
Architecture is a measurable iteration, not a one-time declaration.
Chapter recap.
First, test whether one augmented model call can finish the task.
Second, prefer a workflow while the path remains controllable.
Third, let measurable results decide whether to upgrade to an agent.
Remember the complete method in three lines.
If one augmented model call can solve the task, do not build a workflow
first.
If you can draw the execution path in advance, do not build an
autonomous agent first.
When you truly need an agent, protect it with environmental feedback,
stopping conditions, permissions, and reliable tool interfaces.
The Agent Architecture Decision Ladder is simple: one augmented call,
then a controlled workflow, then runtime orchestration, and only then
full autonomy.
Keep each upgrade only when completion rate, cost, latency, or human
effort measurably improves.
Mature agent systems do not maximize freedom.
They make every layer of freedom earn its place.
Follow Tiny Agent to keep turning fast-moving AI and agent ideas into
practical ways to choose tasks, delegate work, verify results, and
control risk.